### Research themes

Infectious disease is one of the leading causes of mortality in children under five*. The advent of large-scale genomic sequencing technology, open access data and increasing collaborations worldwide has enabled research scientists to tackle the problem of infectious disease from a global standpoint. Through various projects, we aim to understand the evolution of bacteria associated with pneumonia, meningitis and neonatal sepsis in a global context, in particular are those whose major disease burden are in resource-poor settings.

*[World Health Organization](https://www.who.int/topics/infectious_diseases/en/)

#### Our key species of interest

##### *Streptococcus pneumoniae*
*Streptococcus pneumoniae* naturally colonises the nasopharynx of healthy individuals but can cause serious invasive diseases such as bacteremia and meningitis and is the leading cause of bacterial pneumonia. In 2011 we sequenced 20 000 pneumococcal strains from across the globe in the effort to understand how this bacterium was responding to the vaccine. The [Global Pneumococcal Sequencing (GPS)](https://www.pneumogen.net/) project produced the largest database of pneumococcal genomes and successfully demonstrated the importance of genomic surveillance by detecting key pneumococcal strains that evade vaccine and antibiotics on national and international level. In the GPS 2.0, we will extend the temporal coverage to characterise the post vaccine equilibrated population so as to inform future vaccine design, and span the geographical coverage to investigate the pneumococcal population in regions with high burden of pneumococcal diseases. Establishing a working system for sustainable genomic surveillance, providing bioinformatic training to our project partners, capacity building in priority countries and engaging policy makers are also our key activities in the GPS 2.0.

##### *Neisseria meningitidis*
*Neisseria meningitidis*, the meningococcus, is a species of bacteria found exclusively in humans, which is a considerable cause of bacterial meningitis, as well as septicemia. These infections are difficult to treat and have a high case fatality rate, but are asymptomatic carriage infections in most cases.  The meningococcus has a substantial disease burden in the meningitis belt of sub-saharan Africa, where the incidence of infection and disease are much higher than elsewhere globally. We work on several whole-genome sequenced datasets of *N. meningitidis* including a large Burkina Faso carriage [collection](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/23914778), the MenAfriCar meningitis belt carriage surveillance project, and a global collection of carriage and disease isolates with considerable temporal spread.

##### *Streptococcus agalactiae*
Group B *Streptococcus* (GBS or *Streptococcus agalactiae*) is an opportunistic pathogen and a major cause of neonatal invasive disease, with a particular impact on infant mortality in low and middle-income countries (LMICs), where disease prevention strategies are less often implemented or have low coverage. The [JUNO](gbsgen.net) project will conduct a global genomic survey of GBS isolates from across a broad geographical and temporal span with the central aim of informing vaccine development and other disease intervention strategies. The project will focus on three key areas of GBS biology: global genomic diversity, genetic associations with the disease and transmission.
